---
tags: exercise, intro, Python
Created on: 2023.09.05 at 19:45
---

# Class Project 01

It is _very important_ that you actually type the given code in by hand _exactly as it is written_. There are two reasons for this:

1. Attention to detail is a very important difference between people who are good at their job and people who are merely mediocre.
2. Sometimes the point of an exercise will be to fix something which has intentionally been written as broken.

## Exercise 01.01: Your First Program &mdash; Strings and Comments

### Task 01.01.01: Make a new file

Create a directory in your `aam-python` directory called `project-01`. Open your editor and **_type_** the following code:

```Python
# Name: Frodo Baggins
print("Hello world!")
print("Hello yourself")
print('Type this exactly the way that I have typed it')
print("Don't change anything, even if you feel 'smart.'")
print("""\tSometimes things don't do what you would expect, and\n
         that's\t\tokay""")
```

Change the line which includes `Frodo Baggins` so that it says your name instead.

Save that as a file named `prj01_02.py` in your `aam-python/project-01` directory.

### Task 01.01.02: Run your new file as a Python script

Open your terminal and change directories to your `aam-python/project-01` directory. At the command line, type

```
$ python3 prj01_02.py
```

#### Expected Output (What Should I See?)

After running this code through the Python interpreter (that's what happens when you call `python3` with a filename argument), you should see the following output:

```
Hello world!
Hello yourself
Type this exactly the way that I have typed it
Don't change anything, even if you feel 'smart.'
Sometimes things don't do what you would expect, and

	that's okay
```

### Task 01.01.03: Progress Check!

Answer the following questions:

1. When the _octothorpe_ character `#` occurs in a line, it signifies to Python that everything else on the line is a comment and should be ignored. What happens if something is written to the left of `#` on a line?
   > Some people have different names for `#`, including _hash_, _pound_, _mesh_, or _number sign_. Relax. It's not important.
1. A sequence of typable characters enclosed in double quotes `"like this"` is a `str`, which is short for _string_. Are there any other ways to enclose a `str`?
1. Even though they take two keystrokes to type, both `\n` and `\t` act as single character. The _backslash_ `\` is called the _escape character_ and indicates that the character following it should be treated in a special way.
   - How is `"\n"` treated?
   - How is `"\t"` treated?
   - How should `"\\"` be treated?
1. What does the `print(...)` function do?
1. What will happen if you add `print("Lots of people have phone #s")` as the last line of the file?
1. What is wrong with `print('The bird's the word!')`?

### Common Problems

1. I got a `SyntaxError: invalid syntax` when I tried `python3 prj01_02.py`.
   - Yes, that's possible. A `SyntaxError` occurs when you type something that doesn't match the rules of Python. Look at what you typed and look at what was specified. Do they match? A good way to check is word-by-word **in reverse order**.
1. I get `can't open file 'prj01_02.py': [Errno 2] No such file or directory`.
   - You need to make sure the current working directory of the terminal is the directory in which you saved your `prj01_02.py` file.
1. Nothing happens when I run `python3 prj01_02.py`.
   - You need to use the `print` function or you won't see output.

## Exercise 01.02: Arithmetic

Here are some symbols. Let's give them names, and then during the exercise, you can identify the mathematical operation which goes with each.

| Symbol | Name     | Symbol | Name                     |
| :----: | :------- | :----: | :----------------------- |
|  `+`   | plus     |  `<`   | less than                |
|  `-`   | minus    |  `>`   | greater than             |
|  `*`   | asterisk |  `<=`  | less than or equal to    |
|  `/`   | slash    |  `>=`  | greater than or equal to |
|  `%`   | percent  |        |                          |

It's good practice to call the symbol by its name when you're programming, even when what you're programming is math, to get used to the symbols being just that &mdash; symbols.

> The name of the symbol `*` is _asterisk_, not _Asterix_. Asterix is a cartoon Gaul who has a popular series of comic books in Europe, along with his friend Obelix and a cast of ragtag companions.

### Task 01.02.01 Make another new file

Open a new file in your editor and type the following:

```Python
# Name: Frodo Baggins
print("Let's count some things.")

print("Bobs", 23 + 40 / 5)
print("Larrys", 3 + 10 * 7 % 6)

print("Here is a strange one:", 4 - 5 + 2 - 6 % 3 + 8 / 10 - 1)

print("Is 5 + 3 < 2 - 5?", 5 + 3 < 2 - 5)
print("Let's check.")
print("5 + 3 =", 5 + 3)
print("2 - 5 =", 2 - 5)

print("Is it greater?",  8 > -3)
print("Is it greater or equal?", 8 >= -3)
print("Is it less or equal?", 8 <= -3)
```

Replace `Frodo Baggins` with your name. Save it as `prj01_03.py` and then in your terminal run the command

```
$ python3 prj01_03.py
```

### Task 01.02.02 Progress Check

Answer the following questions:

1. What arithmetic operators are performed by each of the symbols we described in the table?
1. Explain the order of operations utilized by Python.
1. Is `2 / 3 / 4` the same as `(2 / 3) / 4` or `2 / (3 / 4)` according to Python? Predict it then test your prediction.
1. You can work with Python in _interactive mode_ by running
   ```
   $ python3
   ```
   Use interactive mode to discover what the operators `//` and `**` do when applied to integers.

### Common Problem: Something weird happened!

This usually comes from miscopying the code. Here are some "tricks" which help you focus on details and notice differences:

1. Write a comment above each line of code explaining to yourself in plain English what the code does.
2. Read your `.py` file... backward. Compare it to the given code.
3. Read your `.py` file out loud, even the symbolic characters, using their names instead of the operator names.

## Exercise 01.03: Variables and Names

Programmers like to give memorable names to the values used in computation; in mathematics, there are generally only a few variables floating around in a given problem, but a long enough computer program could utilize hundreds of different variables. In mathematics, a variable is a letter used to represent an unknown quantity; in programming, a _variable_ is a name bound to a particular value.

> Some languages allow or require variables to be declared with a particular _type_ before the value is assigned. Also, some languages are _strictly typed_, meaning that once a variable has been bound to a particular type of value, it cannot be changed to a different type. My **new favorite language**, [Rust](https://rust-lang.org), goes even further: the value of a variable cannot even be changed unless the type is specified as _mutable_.

The standard _naming convention_ in Python is to use all lower case letters in variable names, and when multiple words are convenient to aid in remembering the purpose of the variable, they should be separated using the underscore character `_`.

### Task 01.03.01: Make another new file!

Open a new file in your editor and type the following:

```Python
planes = 100
seats_per_plane = 12.0
pilots = 30
passengers = 110
planes_not_flown = planes - pilots
planes_flown = pilots

airpool_capacity = planes_flown * seats_per_plane
average_passengers_per_plane = passengers / planes_flown

print("There are", planes, " small planes in the fleet.")
print("We have", pilots, "pilots today.")
print("There will be", planes_not_flown, "grounded planes today.")
print("We can transport", air_pool_capacity - pilots, "passengers today.")
print("We have", passengers, "today.")
print("We will need to put about", average_passengers_per_plane,
      "passengers on each plane.")
```

Save that as `prj01_04.py` and run

```
$ python3 prj01_04.py
```

#### Subtask 01.03.01.01

You should have just obtained your first **intentional error**. Fix it! The error message will be of help to you.

#### Subtask 01.03.01.02: Break Stuff
Now that you see one of the ways you can have errors in Python, it's going to be part of your task in every assignment to:

1. Fix broken stuff.
2. Break other stuff, document the break, and then fix it again.

The first of these is going to require you to carefully read two things: the error messages and the help files. Python has an interactive help mode which can give you feedback about many commands you may try to use in the course of developing Python code. Sometimes the help files are overly technical and of little use, and other times they'll tell you exactly what you need to fix. 

> I recommend having two terminal windows open whenever you're working on code: one where you run your modules, and one which is just sitting inside the Python interpreter. The second one will be used for commands like
> ```Python
> >>> help(str)
> ```

The second of of these new tasks will often require you to see what happens when you mess up the code that you wrote, often by looking for places you can make **significant typos**.