---
tags: exercise, intro, Python
Created On: 2023.09.11 at 12:13
---

# Class Project 00

New terminology will look like **terminology**; text to which I wish to draw your attention _will be emphasized_. Code and commands to be typed on the computer `will look like this`, and when they are longer they will look as follows:

```Python
this = "some code"
```

Sometimes simple mathematics will need to be included, and we'll deal with that when it happens.

$$F(x) = \int_0^x f(t)\,dt$$

> Anything in a box like this is a side remark. Consider it like a footnote.
>
> > They can be nested.
> >
> > > I won't use nesting too often, but it's nice for quotations.
>
> _Advanced_: This will indicate something for people who want to try things that are more complicated.

## Organization

These projects will be broken into **Exercises**, which will individually be broken into **Tasks** and those into **Subtasks**, if that level of structure is necessary; they will be numbered `PP.EE.TT.SS` which is pretty complicated but allows us great flexibility when we need to name files.
For instance, the file associated with Project 03 Exercise 04 will be called `prj_03_04.py`

## Exercise 00.01: Setup

These aren't really related to learning to code, they're just getting your "software stack" ready.

### Task 00.01.01: Text Editor

A text editor is a program which lets you type unformatted text on a computer. All operating systems come with one. While any text editor will do, the default Notepad (Windows) and TextEdit (MacOS) leave a lot to be desired. Here are some options which are **free and open source software (FOSS)**.

| Operating System | Options             |
| ---------------- | ------------------- |
| Windows          | Notepad++           |
| MacOS            | gedit, CotEditor    |
| Linux (GUI)      | gedit, Xed, leafpad |

> _Advanced_: On the off chance that you're using Linux via the command line, you probably don't need any help with this. I suggest using `screen` and your favorite choice of `vim`, `emacs`, or `nano`. Anyone using linux at the console already has a preference and I won't try to sway you.
>
> > `vim` is the best. ~Dr. G

> _Advanced_: For our purposes you should avoid the more powerful versions of text editor which have the ability to do special things with code. These are more properly called **integrated development environments** or **IDEs**, and the most popular is Visual Studio Code.

Henceforth this program will be called your **editor**.

### Task 00.01.02: Find the **Terminal** on your computer

| Operating System | Terminal       |
| ---------------- | -------------- |
| Windows          | **PowerShell** |
| MacOS            | **Terminal**   |
| Linux            | terminal       |

> Warning: If you are using Linux and can't find the terminal, you probably ought not be using Linux. There are many different terminal programs, and every Linux distribution comes with at least one &mdash; it's the basic multi-user login console.

Whichever one of these options you're using, I will refer to all of them as your **terminal** and the interface that it provides you access to I will call the **command line**. Commands that will be typed at the command line will look like this:

```bash
$ touch myface
```

The `$` is called the **prompt**. It might look different, often including the path to the current working directory (or at least the name of the current working directory). For instance, one of my office computers is an old iMac repurposed to be a Linux workstation (running [Pop_OS! 22.04](https://pop.system76.com/)), and its prompt when working in my directory for this class looks like so:

```bash
sjgraves@rbn4011-imac-pop-os:~/Documents/aam-python$
```

#### Subtask 00.01.02.01

Test to see if `python3` works in your terminal.

```bash
$ python3
```

The response, when Python is correctly installed, should look something like this:

```
Python 3.10.12 (main, Jun 11 2023, 05:26:28) [GCC 11.4.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>>
```

If that shows up, type `quit()` and press Enter/Return/&crarr;. Skip to [Task 00.01.04](#task-000104-working-environment).

### Task 00.01.03: Get Python

To get Python for the system you are using, head to [https://python.org](https://python.org) and download _Python 3_, in the latest version number; as of this writing, it is Python 3.11. For most purposes, the version number after 3 won't matter.

### Task 00.01.04: Working Environment

You're going to want to know how to navigate in the terminal. You should look up on the internet (using DuckDuckGo, Brave Search, or some other privacy-focused search engine) the commands used in your particular operating system for navigating the command line. At the minimum, you'll need to know how to create a new directory (also called a folder) and how to change directories.

Wherever you keep your files (usually a directory called `Documents` or `My Documents` or something) create a new directory called `aam-python`. I recommend that you keep your project files organized; this will partly be automatic because I'll encourage a particular filename convention.